h1. Cloud

There is a special aggregation feature provided by PlayMorphia called cloud. One immediate example of cloud usage is found in the Yabe sample application.

In Yabe sample application, a @Post@ model is defined to capture blog post data. Each @Post@ could be associated with zero or more tags. In the following example, PostA has been tagged with "play" and "architecture", PostB has been tagged with "play", "mvc" and "test".

!images/cloud-model!

Now we want to calculate the tag cloud, and we expect it should be like as follows:

!images/cloud-diagram!

Now let's see some source code:

bc. // Post model class
@Entity public class Post extends Model {
    public String title;
    public String content;
    ...
    public Set<String> tags = new HashSet<String>();
    ...
}
// calculate tag cloud
public class Tag {
    public static Map<String, Long> getCloud() {
        return Post._cloud("tags");
    }
}
// Test code to verify the tag cloud computation
Map<String, Long> cloud = Tag.getCloud();
assertEquals(cloud.get("blue"), 1);
assertEquals(cloud.get("green"), 1);
assertEquals(cloud.get("red"), 2);

And compare to the JPA version code:

bc. // Post model class
@Entity public class Post extends Model {
    public String title;
    public String content;
    ...
    public Set<Tag> tags;
    ...
}
// Tag model class
@Entity public class Tag extends Model {
    public String name;
    ...
    public static List<Map> getCloud() {
        List<Map> result = Tag.find(
            "select new map(t.name as tag, count(p.id) as pound) from Post p join p.tags as t group by t.name"
        ).fetch();
        return result;
    }
}
// Test code to verify the tag cloud computation
List<Map> cloud = Tag.getCloud();
Collections.sort(cloud, new Comparator<Map>() {
    public int compare(Map m1, Map m2) {
        return m1.get("tag").toString().compareTo(m2.get("tag").toString());
    }
});
assertEquals("[{tag=Blue, pound=1}, {tag=Green, pound=1}, {tag=Red, pound=2}]", 
  cloud.toString());


h2. <a name="resource">See also</a>

# "Understanding PlayMorphia model":model
# "Aggregation and Group aggregation":statistics