h1. Use of PlayMorphia model: CRUD

Once you have created your "PlayMorphia model class":model it's easy to use it through your application.

h2. <a name="create">Create an new model instance</a>

There is nothing more than initializing an object and call @save()@ method on it to create an new model instance:

bc. User user = new User();
...
user.save()

h3. <a name="batch-insert">Batch Insert</a>

PlayMorphia-1.2.8 add support to batch insert. Suppose you have a list of model constructed, before v1.2.8 you do it using the following code:

bc. List<MyModel> myModels = ...;
for (MyModel model: myModels) model.save();

Now you do it as follows:

bc. List<MyModel> myModels = ...;
MyModel.insert(myModels);

Note this is not a simple syntax sugar but instead it will call to @DBCollection.insert(List<DBObject>)@ interface.

h2. <a name="read">Read model from MongoDB</a>

To read a model from MongoDB you will need the @ID@ object. The following sample code shows how to read @User@ model from MongoDB in a controller:

bc. public static void show(String userId) {
    notFoundIfNull(userId);
    User user = User.findById(userId);
    notFoundIfNull(user);
    render(user);
}

p(note). You can always pass in @java.lang.String@ type object into @Model.findById()@ method without regarding to the real @ID@ field type. PlayMorphia model will automatically handle the type conversion.

h2. <a name="update">Update model</a>

Once you read a model from MongoDB you can modify it's properties and then call @save()@ method on the model instance to update the modified properties into MongoDB. The following sample code change the user's role to "admin" and save the updates to MongoDB:

bc. User user = User.findById(userId);
user.role = "admin";
user.save();

h3. <a name="batch-update">Batch update</a>

-Batch update not directly supported in PlayMorphia yet, but it's easy to do via the morphia @Datastore@ interface:-

Before v1.2.6 you do batch update like this:

bc. Datastore ds = Employee.ds();
UpdateOperations op = ds.createUpdateOperations(Employee.class);
UpdateOperations<Employee> op = ds.createUpdateOperations(Employee.class).inc("salary", 10000).inc("bonus", 99999);
Query<Employee> q = (Query<Employee>)Employee.q().findBy("department", "IT").getMorphiaQuery();
ds.update(q, op);

Now you do it this way:

bc. Employee.o().inc("salary, bonus", 10000, 99999).update("department", "IT");

p(note). util v1.2.6 PlayMorphia does NOT provide lifecycle events for batch update yet

h2. <a name="delete">Delete model</a>

Call @delete()@ method on the model object if you want to delete the document it corresponding to in MongoDB:

bc. User user = User.findById(userId);
user.delete();

h3. <a name="batch-delete">Batch delete</a>

It's easy to do batch delete via <a href="">@MorphiaQuery@</a> interface:

bc. Student.q().filter("score < ", 60).delete();

To delete all record of a collection, you can do either one of the following:

bc. User.deleteAll();
User.q().delete();

<a name="id"></a>

h2. <a name="resource">See also</a>

# "Understanding PlayMorphia model":model
# %(next)"Using Query":query%
# "Atomic update operations":update
# "Introduction to lifecycle event handling":lifecycle