h1. PlayMorphia version history

h2. <a name="roadmap">TODO list</a>

* MongoDB multi-tenant support

h2. <a name="1.2.10">Updates in 1.2.10</a>

* The new <a href="update"><code>_update</code> interface on model class</a>
* Documentation update:
** Update document for @NoAutoTimestamp@ annotation
* Bug fixes:
** "Model.groupAverage doesn't respect Model.Column annotation":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/98
** "Application.conf morphia.autoTimestamp doesn't work at all":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/97
** "@Unique validation not work correctly when updating record":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/96

h2. <a name="1.2.9b">Updates in 1.2.9b</a>

* Bug fixes:
** "Syntax error in morphiaFixture.tag":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/92 - thanks "davinchew":https://github.com/davinchew for report this issue and contribute fix
** "Invalid id config when Batch Insert":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/89

<div style="text-decoration:line-through"><h2> <a name="1.2.9a">Updates in 1.2.9a</a></h2>

Disable generic getId() as an urgent fix to "Strange enhancement exception caused by generic getId() method of morphia model":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/88
</div>

p(note). Version 1.2.9a is recalled because issue #88 is not valid

h2. <a name="1.2.9">Updates in 1.2.9</a>

* Enhancements:
** Allow <code>@com.google.code.morphia.annotations.Converters</code> annotation be put on field type class declaration
** Generic @getId()@ method interface
** "Handle transient field":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/87
* Bug fixes:
** "cannot use class field name as parameter in Model._distinct()":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/85

h2. <a name="1.2.8">Updates in 1.2.8</a>

* "Support MongoDB driver option configuration":config#driver-options - thanks "mikevalenty":https://github.com/mikevalenty for the contribution
* "Support configure MongoDB connection using url":config#connection - thanks "James Ward":https://github.com/jamesward for the contribution
* "Support batch insert":crud#batch-insert
* <a href="model#id">Support <code>String</code> type system generated ID field</a>
* Bug fixes:
** "Loading of fixtures no longer supports references when running on PlayFramework 1.2.4+":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/55
** <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/74">1.2.6 causes "bad type, not parametrized" exception with mongo 2.7.2 driver</a>

h2. <a name="1.2.7">Updates in 1.2.7</a>

p(Note). v1.2.7 works with PlayFramework 1.2.4+. If you are using PlayFramework 1.2.3 or below, please use PlayMorphia v1.2.6a

* Support PlayFramework 1.2.4+
* Support "unique check":https://github.com/playframework/play/blob/1.2.x/documentation/manual/validation-builtin.textile#unique

h2. <a name="1.2.6a">Updates in 1.2.6a</a>

* Bug fix: https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/75

h2. <a name="1.2.6">Updates in 1.2.6</a>

* Support atomic update operations
* Bug fix: https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/71

h2. <a name="1.2.5b">Updates in 1.2.5b</a>

* **break change** Calling MorphiaPlugin.MorphiaModelLoader.fetch(), the @keywords@ parameter will be splited by non-words characters (@\W@), and compose @And@ condition first, then the @And@ criteria container will be composed to final criteria with @Or@ condition among the searched fields.

h2. <a name="1.2.5a">Updates in 1.2.5a<a/>

* Synchronize to class when get long ID
* trim value when processing where statement in Factory.fetch
* Build system Mavenized

h2. <a name="1.2.4d">Updates in 1.2.4d</a>

* Add BlobGsonAdapter and ModelFactoryGsonAdapter utilities

h2. <a name="1.2.4c">Updates in 1.2.4c</a>

* Support @Column annotation on @Embedded class
* Add T getId(Class<T> class) interface to suppress type casting

h2. <a name="1.2.4b">Updates in 1.2.4b</a>

* Fix bug: <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/48">#48 error when play restart in dev mode when authentication needed</a>
* Fix bug: <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/pull/50">#50: Support enum type in MorphiaPlugin.MorphiaModelLoader.buildProperty</a>
* Fix bug: <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/51">#51: NullPointerException when morphia.id.type configuration not set</a>

p(note). Thank "Vincent Buzzano":https://github.com/vbuzzano for contributing to bug fix of #48 and #50

h2. <a name="1.2.4a">Updates in 1.2.4a</a>

* Fix bug: <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/46">#46: [*morphia.id.type*] configuration are not read by MorphiaPlugin when application class has already enhanced</a>.

h2. <a name="1.2.4">Updates in 1.2.4</a>

* Huge improvements on documentation
* Rewrite Yabe sample and now all tests passed
* Improved GridFS access performance
* Support GridFS delete on both query delete and model entity delete
* Support new lifecycle annotations for clear semantic and better performance
* Add _Cloud aggregation method to Model class
* Fix bug in mongodb java driver: GridFSInputFile does not close inputstream after saved
* Fix bug "#44 When model contains blob field, subsequent saves results in multiple GridFS records with duplicate names":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/44
* Fix bug "#45 Way to avoid redundant log message":https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/45

h2. <a name="1.2.3d">Updates in 1.2.3d</a>

* Fix bug: NullPointerException to fetch blob field before an new field saved

h2. <a name="1.2.3c">Updates in 1.2.3c</a>

* Create index on _created and _modified fields for models annotated with @AutoTimestamp

h2. <a name="1.2.3beta1">Updates in 1.2.3beta1</a>

* Support aggregation operations: max,min,sum,average,count and their group peers
* Support connecting to replica set. Thanks https://github.com/taligent for his contribution
* Supports custom keys to find relations by ID. Thanks https://github.com/zash80 for his contribution

h2. <a name="1.2.2beta1">Updates in 1.2.2beta1</a>

* This is an important and purely community driven release which includes the following updates:
** Support GridFS, thanks Alexander Reelsen (alr@emplify.de) for his contribution!
** Added a morphiaFixture tag. This allows models to be loaded and deleted from within Selenium test cases. Thanks Agile Consulting (http://www.agileconsulting.biz) for their contribution
** Bug fix: Choices list for Reference Collection was always empty. Thanks Lepnio (https://github.com/lepnio) for his contribution

h2. <a name="1.2.1beta6">Updates in 1.2.1beta6</a>

* Fix bug: IllegalStateException of "User defined ID should be populated before persist" when saving a subtype model with @Id fields defined in parent type

h2. <a name="1.2.1beta5">Updates in 1.2.1beta5</a>

* Add disableValidation() to Model. This is useful when your different subtype model have different fields
* Add @NoId annotation. This help to resolve issue discussed in https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/play-framework/hPWJCvefPoI/discussion

h2. <a name="1.2.1beta4">Updates in 1.2.1beta4</a>

* Upgrade morphia to 1.0-snapshot and mongo lib to 2.6.1

h2. <a name="1.2.1beta3">Updates in 1.2.1beta3</a>

* Limited support for multiple mongodb databases

h2. <a name="1.2.1beta2">Updates in 1.2.1beat2</a>

* "test" db used if no database configured and a warning issued
* clear idCache when calling MorphiaFixtures.deleteX
* support auto timestamp

h2. <a name="1.2.1beta1">Updates in 1.2.1beta1</a>

* Make it compatible with play-1.2.x

h2. <a name="1.2beta-6">Updates in 1.2beta-6</a>

* Support filter (where clause) in Model.Factory.count and Model.Factory.fetch
* Add @Global annotated ObjectIdBinder to app. This could fix issue #5
* Revert morphia library to 0.99-Snapshot as a workaround for issue #16

h2. <a name="1.2beta-5">Updates in 1.2beta-5</a>

* Fix issue: https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues#issue/12
* Support simple where clause in MorphiaPlugin.MorphiaModelLoader.fetch|count

h2. <a name="1.2beta-4">Updates in 1.2beta-4</a>

* morphia lib updated to 0.99 release
* mongo driver updated to 0.24 release

h2. <a name="1.2beta-3">Updates in 1.2beta-3</a>

* Fixed issues: 7,8,9, see http://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues
* Add new configuration: morphia.defaultWriteConcern

h2. <a name="1.2beta-2">Updates in 1.2beta-2</a>

* Fix bug: Play reload cause MappingException (https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues#issue/6)
* Supress some debug information (change debug to trace) in MorphiaEnhancer and MorphiaPlugin

h2. <a name="1.2beta">Updates in 1.2beta</a>

* Upgrade Morphia Library to 0.99-SNAPSHOT, mongodb driver to 2.3
* Better generic support in Model query methods. Now you don't need type cast for methods return a of entities. But if you use field or criteria in your expression, type cast is still needed
* Support new Or query interface which is released since morphia-0.97

Note using Long as IdType (configured with "morphia.id.type") and you have @Reference annotation in your model entities, then you will be in trouble. Check <a href="http://groups.google.com/group/morphia/browse_thread/thread/bdd51121c2845973">this</a> thread for detail. Yabe sample has been updated and now use ObjectId as ID type for the same reason

Known Issues:
1. <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/issue/5">StackOverflowError with unbind</a>
2. <a href="https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues/issue/6">Play reload cause MappingException</a>

h2. <a name="1.1d">Updates in 1.1d</a>

* Fix bug: Play reload cause MappingException (https://github.com/greenlaw110/play-morphia/issues#issue/6)
* Supress some debug information (change debug to trace) in MorphiaEnhancer and MorphiaPlugin

h2. <a name="1.1c">Updates in 1.1c</a>

* Fix bug in MorphiaFixture: delete(Class<Model>) -> delete(Class<? extends Model)

h2. <a name="1.1b">Updates in 1.1b</a>

* Yabe unit test passed
* Add isNew() method to Model
* Model.save() now return Model object which is comply to JPAModel; Use Model.save2() to return Key<Model>

h2. <a name="1.1a">Updates in 1.1a</a>

* Fix problems with User defined @Id field
* Add information to document on how to create user defined @Id field entity

